---
title: Statistical Analysis with Missing Data
---

This is the lecture note for Biostat 880: Statistical Analysis with Missing Data.

## Overview and Complete-Case Analysis

### Missingness hides a meaningful value for analysis

Denote $Y$ as the data matrix if no data were missing and $M$ as the missing-data indicator matrix. The $(i,j)$-th element indicates missing (1) or observed (0). Pattern concerns distribution of $M$, whereas mechanism concerns distribution of $M$ given $Y$. 

We study the following three missingness mechanism: 

+ Missing Completely at Random (MCAR): if missingness is independent of $Y$: 

$$p(M|Y) = p(M) \text{ for all } Y$$

+ Missing at Random (MAR):  missingness only depends on observed components $Y_{\text{obs}}$

$$p(M|Y) = p(M|Y_{\text{obs}}) \text{ for all } Y$$

+ Missing not at random (MNAR): if missingness depends on missing components of $Y$,
after conditioning on observed data.

For example, given Monotone Missing Data, we assume MAR if dropout depends on values recorded prior to drop-out, and MNAR if dropout depends on values that are missing (that is, after drop-out).

### Complete-Case Analysis

Inefficiency of Complete-Case Analysis, possibly caused by dropout, depends on how much information is contained in the discarded incomplete cases relative to the complete cases. One way to reduce the potential bias of such discarded data is to weight complete cases differentially. 

Suppose we have: 

- Design variables $Z$ observed for whole population. 
- Fully observed survey variables $X$ measured for respondents and non-respondents. 
- Survey variables $Y$ measured only for respondents.
- We would like to use information in $X$ and $Z$ to weight the respondents. 


